<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: Widowhood</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Widowhood</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-7-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>The death of the Prince Consort was the central turning-point in the history of Queen Victoria. She herself felt that her true life had ceased with her husband‚Äôs, and that the remainder of her days upon earth was of a twilight nature‚ÅÝ‚Äîan epilogue to a drama that was done. Nor is it possible that her biographer should escape a similar impression. For him, too, there is a darkness over the latter half of that long career. The first forty-two years of the Queen‚Äôs life are illuminated by a great and varied quantity of authentic information. With Albert‚Äôs death a veil descends. Only occasionally, at fitful and disconnected intervals, does it lift for a moment or two; a few main outlines, a few remarkable details may be discerned; the rest is all conjecture and ambiguity. Thus, though the Queen survived her great bereavement for almost as many years as she had lived before it, the chronicle of those years can bear no proportion to the tale of her earlier life. We must be content in our ignorance with a brief and summary relation.</p>
				<p>The sudden removal of the Prince was not merely a matter of overwhelming personal concern to Victoria; it was an event of national, of European importance. He was only forty-two, and in the ordinary course of nature he might have been expected to live at least thirty years longer. Had he done so it can hardly be doubted that the whole development of the English polity would have been changed. Already at the time of his death he filled a unique place in English public life; already among the inner circle of politicians he was accepted as a necessary and useful part of the mechanism of the State. Lord Clarendon, for instance, spoke of his death as ‚Äúa national calamity of far greater importance than the public dream of,‚Äù and lamented the loss of his ‚Äúsagacity and foresight,‚Äù which, he declared, would have been ‚Äúmore than ever valuable‚Äù in the event of an American war.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-298" id="noteref-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a> And, as time went on, the Prince‚Äôs influence must have enormously increased. For, in addition to his intellectual and moral qualities, he enjoyed, by virtue of his position, one supreme advantage which every other holder of high office in the country was without: he was permanent. Politicians came and went, but the Prince was perpetually installed at the centre of affairs. Who can doubt that, towards the end of the century, such a man, grown grey in the service of the nation, virtuous, intelligent, and with the unexampled experience of a whole lifetime of government, would have acquired an extraordinary prestige? If, in his youth, he had been able to pit the Crown against the mighty Palmerston and to come off with equal honours from the contest, of what might he not have been capable in his old age? What Minister, however able, however popular, could have withstood the wisdom, the irreproachability, the vast prescriptive authority, of the venerable Prince? It is easy to imagine how, under such a ruler, an attempt might have been made to convert England into a State as exactly organised, as elaborately trained, as efficiently equipped, and as autocratically controlled, as Prussia herself. Then perhaps, eventually, under some powerful leader‚ÅÝ‚Äîa Gladstone or a Bright‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe democratic forces in the country might have rallied together, and a struggle might have followed in which the Monarchy would have been shaken to its foundations. Or, on the other hand, Disraeli‚Äôs hypothetical prophecy might have come true. ‚ÄúWith Prince Albert,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúwe have buried our‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ sovereign. This German Prince has governed England for twenty-one years with a wisdom and energy such as none of our kings have ever shown. If he had outlived some of our ‚Äòold stagers‚Äô he would have given us the blessings of absolute government.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-299" id="noteref-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a></p>
				<p>The English Constitution‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat indescribable entity‚ÅÝ‚Äîis a living thing, growing with the growth of men, and assuming ever-varying forms in accordance with the subtle and complex laws of human character. It is the child of wisdom and chance. The wise men of <time datetime="1688">1688</time> moulded it into the shape we know, but the chance that George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> could not speak English gave it one of its essential peculiarities‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe system of a Cabinet independent of the Crown and subordinate to the Prime Minister. The wisdom of Lord Grey saved it from petrifaction and destruction, and set it upon the path of Democracy. Then chance intervened once more; a female sovereign happened to marry an able and pertinacious man; and it seemed likely that an element which had been quiescent within it for years‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe element of irresponsible administrative power‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas about to become its predominant characteristic and to change completely the direction of its growth. But what chance gave chance took away. The Consort perished in his prime; and the English Constitution, dropping the dead limb with hardly a tremor, continued its mysterious life as if he had never been.</p>
				<p>One human being, and one alone, felt the full force of what had happened. The Baron, by his fireside at Coburg, suddenly saw the tremendous fabric of his creation crash down into sheer and irremediable ruin. Albert was gone, and he had lived in vain. Even his blackest hypochondria had never envisioned quite so miserable a catastrophe. Victoria wrote to him, visited him, tried to console him by declaring with passionate conviction that she would carry on her husband‚Äôs work. He smiled a sad smile and looked into the fire. Then he murmured that he was going where Albert was‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat he would not be long.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-300" id="noteref-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> He shrank into himself. His children clustered round him and did their best to comfort him, but it was useless: the Baron‚Äôs heart was broken. He lingered for eighteen months, and then, with his pupil, explored the shadow and the dust.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>With appalling suddenness Victoria had exchanged the serene radiance of happiness for the utter darkness of woe. In the first dreadful moments those about her had feared that she might lose her reason, but the iron strain within her held firm, and in the intervals between the intense paroxysms of grief it was observed that the Queen was calm. She remembered, too, that Albert had always disapproved of exaggerated manifestations of feeling, and her one remaining desire was to do nothing but what he would have wished. Yet there were moments when her royal anguish would brook no restraints. One day she sent for the Duchess of Sutherland, and, leading her to the Prince‚Äôs room, fell prostrate before his clothes in a flood of weeping, while she adjured the Duchess to tell her whether the beauty of Albert‚Äôs character had ever been surpassed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-301" id="noteref-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a> At other times a feeling akin to indignation swept over her. ‚ÄúThe poor fatherless baby of eight months,‚Äù she wrote to the King of the Belgians, ‚Äúis now the utterly heartbroken and crushed widow of forty-two! My <em>life</em> as a <em>happy</em> one is <em>ended</em>! The world is gone for <em>me</em>!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Oh! to be cut off in the prime of life‚ÅÝ‚Äîto see our pure, happy, quiet, domestic life, which <em>alone</em> enabled me to bear my <em>much</em> disliked position, <strong>cut off</strong> at forty-two‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen <em>I had</em> hoped with such instinctive certainty that God never <em>would</em> part us, and would let us grow old together (though <em>he</em> always talked of the shortness of life)‚ÅÝ‚Äîis <em>too awful</em>, too cruel!‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="noteref-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a> The tone of outraged Majesty seems to be discernible. Did she wonder in her heart of hearts how the Deity could have dared?</p>
				<p>But all other emotions gave way before her overmastering determination to continue, absolutely unchanged, and for the rest of her life on earth, her reverence, her obedience, her idolatry. ‚ÄúI am anxious to repeat <em>one</em> thing,‚Äù she told her uncle, ‚Äúand <em>that one</em> is my firm resolve, my <em>irrevocable decision</em>, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, that <em>his</em> wishes‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>his</em> plans‚ÅÝ‚Äîabout everything, <em>his</em> views about <em>everything</em> are to be <em>my law</em>! And <em>no human power</em> will make me swerve from <em>what he</em> decided and wished.‚Äù She grew fierce, she grew furious, at the thought of any possible intrusion between her and her desire. Her uncle was coming to visit her, and it flashed upon her that <em>he</em> might try to interfere with her and seek to ‚Äúrule the roost‚Äù as of old. She would give him a hint. ‚ÄúI am <em>also determined</em>,‚Äù she wrote, ‚Äúthat <em>no one</em> person‚ÅÝ‚Äîmay <em>he</em> be ever so good, ever so devoted among my servants‚ÅÝ‚Äîis to lead or guide or dictate <em>to me</em>. I know <em>how</em> he would disapprove it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Though miserably weak and utterly shattered, my spirit rises when I think <em>any</em> wish or plan of his is to be touched or changed, or I am to be <em>made to do</em> anything.‚Äù She ended her letter in grief and affection. She was, she said, his ‚Äúever wretched but devoted child, Victoria <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr>‚Äù And then she looked at the date: it was the <time datetime="1688-12-24">24th of December</time>. An agonising pang assailed her, and she dashed down a postcript‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat a Xmas! I won‚Äôt think of it.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="noteref-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a></p>
				<p>At first, in the tumult of her distresses, she declared that she could not see her Ministers, and the Princess Alice, assisted by Sir Charles Phipps, the keeper of the Privy Purse, performed, to the best of her ability, the functions of an intermediary. After a few weeks, however, the Cabinet, through Lord John Russell, ventured to warn the Queen that this could not continue.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-304" id="noteref-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a> She realised that they were right: Albert would have agreed with them; and so she sent for the Prime Minister. But when Lord Palmerston arrived at Osborne, in the pink of health, brisk, with his whiskers freshly dyed, and dressed in a brown overcoat, light grey trousers, green gloves, and blue studs, he did not create a very good impression.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-305" id="noteref-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a></p>
				<p>Nevertheless, she had grown attached to her old enemy, and the thought of a political change filled her with agitated apprehensions. The Government, she knew, might fall at any moment; she felt she could not face such an eventuality; and therefore, six months after the death of the Prince, she took the unprecedented step of sending a private message to Lord Derby, the leader of the Opposition, to tell him that she was not in a fit state of mind or body to undergo the anxiety of a change of Government, and that if he turned the present Ministers out of office it would be at the risk of sacrificing her life‚ÅÝ‚Äîor her reason. When this message reached Lord Derby he was considerably surprised. ‚ÄúDear me!‚Äù was his cynical comment. ‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt think she was so fond of them as <em>that</em>.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-306" id="noteref-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a></p>
				<p>Though the violence of her perturbations gradually subsided, her cheerfulness did not return. For months, for years, she continued in settled gloom. Her life became one of almost complete seclusion. Arrayed in thickest crepe, she passed dolefully from Windsor to Osborne, from Osborne to Balmoral. Rarely visiting the capital, refusing to take any part in the ceremonies of state, shutting herself off from the slightest intercourse with society, she became almost as unknown to her subjects as some potentate of the East. They might murmur, but they did not understand. What had she to do with empty shows and vain enjoyments? No! She was absorbed by very different preoccupations. She was the devoted guardian of a sacred trust. Her place was in the inmost shrine of the house of mourning‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere she alone had the right to enter, where she could feel the effluence of a mysterious presence, and interpret, however faintly and feebly, the promptings of a still living soul. That, and that only was her glorious, her terrible duty. For terrible indeed it was. As the years passed her depression seemed to deepen and her loneliness to grow more intense. ‚ÄúI am on a dreary sad pinnacle of solitary grandeur,‚Äù she said.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="noteref-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a> Again and again she felt that she could bear her situation no longer‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat she would sink under the strain. And then, instantly, that Voice spoke: and she braced herself once more to perform, with minute conscientiousness, her grim and holy task.</p>
				<p>Above all else, what she had to do was to make her own the master-impulse of Albert‚Äôs life‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe must work, as he had worked, in the service of the country. That vast burden of toil which he had taken upon his shoulders it was now for her to bear. She assumed the gigantic load; and naturally she staggered under it. While he had lived, she had worked, indeed, with regularity and conscientiousness; but it was work made easy, made delicious, by his care, his forethought, his advice, and his infallibility. The mere sound of his voice, asking her to sign a paper, had thrilled her; in such a presence she could have laboured gladly forever. But now there was a hideous change. Now there were no neat piles and docketings under the green lamp; now there were no simple explanations of difficult matters; now there was nobody to tell her what was right and what was wrong. She had her secretaries, no doubt: there were Sir Charles Phipps, and General Grey, and Sir Thomas Biddulph; and they did their best. But they were mere subordinates: the whole weight of initiative and responsibility rested upon her alone. For so it had to be. ‚ÄúI am <em>determined</em>‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad she not declared it?‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúthat <em>no one</em> person is to lead or guide or dictate to <em>me</em>;‚Äù anything else would be a betrayal of her trust. She would follow the Prince in all things. He had refused to delegate authority; he had examined into every detail with his own eyes; he had made it a rule never to sign a paper without having first, not merely read it, but made notes on it too. She would do the same. She sat from morning till night surrounded by huge heaps of despatch‚ÅÝ‚Äîboxes, reading and writing at her desk‚ÅÝ‚Äîat her desk, alas! which stood alone now in the room.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-308" id="noteref-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a></p>
				<p>Within two years of Albert‚Äôs death a violent disturbance in foreign politics put Victoria‚Äôs faithfulness to a crucial test. The fearful Schleswig-Holstein dispute, which had been smouldering for more than a decade, showed signs of bursting out into conflagration. The complexity of the questions at issue was indescribable. ‚ÄúOnly three people,‚Äù said Palmerston, ‚Äúhave ever really understood the Schleswig-Holstein business‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Prince Consort, who is dead‚ÅÝ‚Äîa German professor, who has gone mad‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I, who have forgotten all about it.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-309" id="noteref-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a> But, though the Prince might be dead, had he not left a vicegerent behind him? Victoria threw herself into the seething embroilment with the vigour of inspiration. She devoted hours daily to the study of the affair in all its windings; but she had a clue through the labyrinth: whenever the question had been discussed, Albert, she recollected it perfectly, had always taken the side of Prussia. Her course was clear. She became an ardent champion of the Prussian point of view. It was a legacy from the Prince, she said.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-310" id="noteref-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> She did not realise that the Prussia of the Prince‚Äôs day was dead, and that a new Prussia, the Prussia of Bismarck, was born. Perhaps Palmerston, with his queer prescience, instinctively apprehended the new danger; at any rate, he and Lord John were agreed upon the necessity of supporting Denmark against Prussia‚Äôs claims. But opinion was sharply divided, not only in the country but in the Cabinet. For eighteen months the controversy raged; while the Queen, with persistent vehemence, opposed the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary. When at last the final crisis arose‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen it seemed possible that England would join forces with Denmark in a war against Prussia‚ÅÝ‚ÄîVictoria‚Äôs agitation grew febrile in its intensity. Towards her German relatives she preserved a discreet appearance of impartiality; but she poured out upon her Ministers a flood of appeals, protests, and expostulations. She invoked the sacred cause of Peace. ‚ÄúThe only chance of preserving peace for Europe,‚Äù she wrote, ‚Äúis by not assisting Denmark, who has brought this entirely upon herself. The Queen suffers much, and her nerves are more and more totally shattered‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But though all this anxiety is wearing her out, it will not shake her firm purpose of resisting any attempt to involve this country in a mad and useless combat.‚Äù She was, she declared, ‚Äúprepared to make a stand,‚Äù even if the resignation of the Foreign Secretary should follow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="noteref-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> ‚ÄúThe Queen,‚Äù she told Lord Granville, ‚Äúis completely exhausted by the anxiety and suspense, and misses her beloved husband‚Äôs help, advice, support, and love in an overwhelming manner.‚Äù She was so worn out by her efforts for peace that she could ‚Äúhardly hold up her head or hold her pen.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="noteref-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a> England did not go to war, and Denmark was left to her fate; but how far the attitude of the Queen contributed to this result it is impossible, with our present knowledge, to say. On the whole, however, it seems probable that the determining factor in the situation was the powerful peace party in the Cabinet rather than the imperious and pathetic pressure of Victoria.</p>
				<p>It is, at any rate, certain that the Queen‚Äôs enthusiasm for the sacred cause of peace was short-lived. Within a few months her mind had completely altered. Her eyes were opened to the true nature of Prussia, whose designs upon Austria were about to culminate in the Seven Weeks‚Äô War. Veering precipitately from one extreme to the other, she now urged her Ministers to interfere by force of arms in support of Austria. But she urged in vain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="noteref-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a></p>
				<p>Her political activity, no more than her social seclusion, was approved by the public. As the years passed, and the royal mourning remained as unrelieved as ever, the animadversions grew more general and more severe. It was observed that the Queen‚Äôs protracted privacy not only cast a gloom over high society, not only deprived the populace of its pageantry, but also exercised a highly deleterious effect upon the dressmaking, millinery, and hosiery trades. This latter consideration carried great weight. At last, early in <time datetime="1864">1864</time>, the rumour spread that Her Majesty was about to go out of mourning, and there was much rejoicing in the newspapers; but unfortunately it turned out that the rumour was quite without foundation. Victoria, with her own hand, wrote a letter to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i> to say so. ‚ÄúThis idea,‚Äù she declared, ‚Äúcannot be too explicitly contradicted. The Queen,‚Äù the letter continued, ‚Äúheartily appreciates the desire of her subjects to see her, and whatever she <em>can</em> do to gratify them in this loyal and affectionate wish, she <em>will</em> do‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But there are other and higher duties than those of mere representation which are now thrown upon the Queen, alone and unassisted‚ÅÝ‚Äîduties which she cannot neglect without injury to the public service, which weigh unceasingly upon her, overwhelming her with work and anxiety.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="noteref-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a> The justification might have been considered more cogent had it not been known that those ‚Äúother and higher duties‚Äù emphasised by the Queen consisted for the most part of an attempt to counteract the foreign policy of Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell. A large section‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps a majority‚ÅÝ‚Äîof the nation were violent partisans of Denmark in the Schleswig-Holstein quarrel; and Victoria‚Äôs support of Prussia was widely denounced. A wave of unpopularity, which reminded old observers of the period preceding the Queen‚Äôs marriage more than twenty-five years before, was beginning to rise. The press was rude; Lord Ellenborough attacked the Queen in the House of Lords; there were curious whispers in high quarters that she had had thoughts of abdicating‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhispers followed by regrets that she had not done so.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="noteref-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> Victoria, outraged and injured, felt that she was misunderstood. She was profoundly unhappy. After Lord Ellenborough‚Äôs speech, General Grey declared that he ‚Äúhad never seen the Queen so completely upset.‚Äù ‚ÄúOh, how fearful it is,‚Äù she herself wrote to Lord Granville, ‚Äúto be suspected‚ÅÝ‚Äîuncheered‚ÅÝ‚Äîunguided and unadvised‚ÅÝ‚Äîand how alone the poor Queen feels!‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="noteref-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> Nevertheless, suffer as she might, she was as resolute as ever; she would not move by a hair‚Äôs breadth from the course that a supreme obligation marked out for her; she would be faithful to the end.</p>
				<p>And so, when Schleswig-Holstein was forgotten, and even the image of the Prince had begun to grow dim in the fickle memories of men, the solitary watcher remained immutably concentrated at her peculiar task. The world‚Äôs hostility, steadily increasing, was confronted and outfaced by the impenetrable weeds of Victoria. Would the world never understand? It was not mere sorrow that kept her so strangely sequestered; it was devotion, it was self-immolation; it was the laborious legacy of love. Unceasingly the pen moved over the black-edged paper. The flesh might be weak, but that vast burden must be borne. And fortunately, if the world would not understand, there were faithful friends who did. There was Lord Granville, and there was kind <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTheodore Martin. Perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMartin, who was so clever, would find means to make people realise the facts. She would send him a letter, pointing out her arduous labours and the difficulties under which she struggled, and then he might write an article for one of the magazines. ‚ÄúIt is not,‚Äù she told him in <time datetime="1863">1863</time>, ‚Äúthe Queen‚Äôs <em>sorrow</em> that keeps her secluded. It is her <em>overwhelming work</em> and her health, which is greatly shaken by her sorrow, and the totally overwhelming amount of work and responsibility‚ÅÝ‚Äîwork which she feels really wears her out. Alice Helps was wonderfully struck at the Queen‚Äôs room; and if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMartin will look at it, she can tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMartin what surrounds her. From the hour she gets out of bed till she gets into it again there is work, work, work‚ÅÝ‚Äîletter-boxes, questions, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which are dreadfully exhausting‚ÅÝ‚Äîand if she had not comparative rest and quiet in the evening she would most likely not be <em>alive</em>. Her brain is constantly overtaxed.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="noteref-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a> It was too true.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>To carry on Albert‚Äôs work‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat was her first duty; but there was another, second only to that, and yet nearer, if possible, to her heart‚ÅÝ‚Äîto impress the true nature of his genius and character upon the minds of her subjects. She realised that during his life he had not been properly appreciated; the full extent of his powers, the supreme quality of his goodness, had been necessarily concealed; but death had removed the need of barriers, and now her husband, in his magnificent entirety, should stand revealed to all. She set to work methodically. She directed Sir Arthur Helps to bring out a collection of the Prince‚Äôs speeches and addresses, and the weighty tome appeared in <time datetime="1862">1862</time>. Then she commanded General Grey to write an account of the Prince‚Äôs early years‚ÅÝ‚Äîfrom his birth to his marriage; she herself laid down the design of the book, contributed a number of confidential documents, and added numerous notes; General Grey obeyed, and the work was completed in <time datetime="1866">1866</time>. But the principal part of the story was still untold, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMartin was forthwith instructed to write a complete biography of the Prince Consort. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMartin laboured for fourteen years. The mass of material with which he had to deal was almost incredible, but he was extremely industrious, and he enjoyed throughout the gracious assistance of Her Majesty. The first bulky volume was published in <time datetime="1874">1874</time>; four others slowly followed; so that it was not until <time datetime="1880">1880</time> that the monumental work was finished.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="noteref-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a></p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMartin was rewarded by a knighthood; and yet it was sadly evident that neither Sir Theodore nor his predecessors had achieved the purpose which the Queen had in view. Perhaps she was unfortunate in her coadjutors, but, in reality, the responsibility for the failure must lie with Victoria herself. Sir Theodore and the others faithfully carried out the task which she had set them‚ÅÝ‚Äîfaithfully put before the public the very image of Albert that filled her own mind. The fatal drawback was that the public did not find that image attractive. Victoria‚Äôs emotional nature, far more remarkable for vigour than for subtlety, rejecting utterly the qualifications which perspicuity, or humour, might suggest, could be satisfied with nothing but the absolute and the categorical. When she disliked she did so with an unequivocal emphasis which swept the object of her repugnance at once and finally outside the pale of consideration; and her feelings of affection were equally unmitigated. In the case of Albert her passion for superlatives reached its height. To have conceived of him as anything short of perfect‚ÅÝ‚Äîperfect in virtue, in wisdom, in beauty, in all the glories and graces of man‚ÅÝ‚Äîwould have been an unthinkable blasphemy: perfect he was, and perfect he must be shown to have been. And so, Sir Arthur, Sir Theodore, and the General painted him. In the circumstances, and under such supervision, to have done anything else would have required talents considerably more distinguished than any that those gentlemen possessed. But that was not all. By a curious mischance Victoria was also able to press into her service another writer, the distinction of whose talents was this time beyond a doubt. The Poet Laureate, adopting, either from complaisance or conviction, the tone of his sovereign, joined in the chorus, and endowed the royal formula with the magical resonance of verse. This settled the matter. Henceforward it was impossible to forget that Albert had worn the white flower of a blameless life.</p>
				<p>The result was doubly unfortunate. Victoria, disappointed and chagrined, bore a grudge against her people for their refusal, in spite of all her efforts, to rate her husband at his true worth. She did not understand that the picture of an embodied perfection is distasteful to the majority of mankind. The cause of this is not so much an envy of the perfect being as a suspicion that he must be inhuman; and thus it happened that the public, when it saw displayed for its admiration a figure resembling the sugary hero of a moral storybook rather than a fellow man of flesh and blood, turned away with a shrug, a smile, and a flippant ejaculation. But in this the public was the loser as well as Victoria. For in truth Albert was a far more interesting personage than the public dreamed. By a curious irony an impeccable waxwork had been fixed by the Queen‚Äôs love in the popular imagination, while the creature whom it represented‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe real creature, so full of energy and stress and torment, so mysterious and so unhappy, and so fallible and so very human‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad altogether disappeared.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Words and books may be ambiguous memorials; but who can misinterpret the visible solidity of bronze and stone? At Frogmore, near Windsor, where her mother was buried, Victoria constructed, at the cost of ¬£200,000, a vast and elaborate mausoleum for herself and her husband. But that was a private and domestic monument, and the Queen desired that wherever her subjects might be gathered together they should be reminded of the Prince. Her desire was gratified; all over the country‚ÅÝ‚Äîat Aberdeen, at Perth, and at Wolverhampton‚ÅÝ‚Äîstatues of the Prince were erected; and the Queen, making an exception to her rule of retirement, unveiled them herself. Nor did the capital lag behind. A month after the Prince‚Äôs death a meeting was called together at the Mansion House to discuss schemes for honouring his memory. Opinions, however, were divided upon the subject. Was a statue or an institution to be preferred? Meanwhile a subscription was opened; an influential committee was appointed, and the Queen was consulted as to her wishes in the matter. Her Majesty replied that she would prefer a granite obelisk, with sculptures at the base, to an institution. But the committee hesitated: an obelisk, to be worthy of the name, must clearly be a monolith; and where was the quarry in England capable of furnishing a granite block of the required size? It was true that there was granite in Russian Finland; but the committee were advised that it was not adapted to resist exposure to the open air. On the whole, therefore, they suggested that a Memorial Hall should be erected, together with a statue of the Prince. Her Majesty assented; but then another difficulty arose. It was found that not more than ¬£60,000 had been subscribed‚ÅÝ‚Äîa sum insufficient to defray the double expense. The Hall, therefore, was abandoned; a statue alone was to be erected; and certain eminent architects were asked to prepare designs. Eventually the committee had at their disposal a total sum of ¬£120,000, since the public subscribed another ¬£10,000, while ¬£50,000 was voted by Parliament. Some years later a joint stock company was formed and built, as a private speculation, the Albert Hall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="noteref-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a></p>
				<p>The architect whose design was selected, both by the committee and by the Queen, was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝGilbert Scott, whose industry, conscientiousness, and genuine piety had brought him to the head of his profession. His lifelong zeal for the Gothic style having given him a special prominence, his handiwork was strikingly visible, not only in a multitude of original buildings, but in most of the cathedrals of England. Protests, indeed, were occasionally raised against his renovations; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott replied with such vigour and unction in articles and pamphlets that not a Dean was unconvinced, and he was permitted to continue his labours without interruption. On one occasion, however, his devotion to Gothic had placed him in an unpleasant situation. The Government offices in Whitehall were to be rebuilt; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott competed, and his designs were successful. Naturally, they were in the Gothic style, combining ‚Äúa certain squareness and horizontality of outline‚Äù with pillar-mullions, gables, high-pitched roofs, and dormers; and the drawings, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott himself observed, ‚Äúwere, perhaps, the best ever sent in to a competition, or nearly so.‚Äù After the usual difficulties and delays the work was at last to be put in hand, when there was a change of Government and Lord Palmerston became Prime Minister. Lord Palmerston at once sent for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott. ‚ÄúWell, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott,‚Äù he said, in his jaunty way, ‚ÄúI can‚Äôt have anything to do with this Gothic style. I must insist on your making a design in the Italian manner, which I am sure you can do very cleverly.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott was appalled; the style of the Italian renaissance was not only unsightly, it was positively immoral, and he sternly refused to have anything to do with it. Thereupon Lord Palmerston assumed a fatherly tone. ‚ÄúQuite true; a Gothic architect can‚Äôt be expected to put up a Classical building; I must find someone else.‚Äù This was intolerable, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott, on his return home, addressed to the Prime Minister a strongly-worded letter, in which he dwelt upon his position as an architect, upon his having won two European competitions, his being an <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.R.A.</abbr>, a gold medallist of the Institute, and a lecturer on architecture at the Royal Academy; but it was useless‚ÅÝ‚ÄîLord Palmerston did not even reply. It then occurred to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott that, by a judicious mixture, he might, while preserving the essential character of the Gothic, produce a design which would give a superficial impression of the Classical style. He did so, but no effect was produced upon Lord Palmerston. The new design, he said, was ‚Äúneither one thing nor ‚Äôtother‚ÅÝ‚Äîa regular mongrel affair‚ÅÝ‚Äîand he would have nothing to do with it either.‚Äù After that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott found it necessary to recruit for two months at Scarborough, ‚Äúwith a course of quinine.‚Äù He recovered his tone at last, but only at the cost of his convictions. For the sake of his family he felt that it was his unfortunate duty to obey the Prime Minister; and, shuddering with horror, he constructed the Government offices in a strictly Renaissance style.</p>
				<p>Shortly afterwards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott found some consolation in building the <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝPancras Hotel in a style of his own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a></p>
				<p>And now another and yet more satisfactory task was his. ‚ÄúMy idea in designing the Memorial,‚Äù he wrote, ‚Äúwas to erect a kind of ciborium to protect a statue of the Prince; and its special characteristic was that the ciborium was designed in some degree on the principles of the ancient shrines. These shrines were models of imaginary buildings, such as had never in reality been erected; and my idea was to realise one of these imaginary structures with its precious materials, its inlaying, its enamels, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr>‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a> His idea was particularly appropriate since it chanced that a similar conception, though in the reverse order of magnitude, had occurred to the Prince himself, who had designed and executed several silver cruet-stands upon the same model. At the Queen‚Äôs request a site was chosen in Kensington Gardens as near as possible to that of the Great Exhibition; and in <time datetime="1864-05">May, 1864</time>, the first sod was turned. The work was long, complicated, and difficult; a great number of workmen were employed, besides several subsidiary sculptors and metal-workers under <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott‚Äôs direction, while at every stage sketches and models were submitted to Her Majesty, who criticised all the details with minute care, and constantly suggested improvements. The frieze, which encircled the base of the monument, was in itself a very serious piece of work. ‚ÄúThis,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott, ‚Äútaken as a whole, is perhaps one of the most laborious works of sculpture ever undertaken, consisting, as it does, of a continuous range of figure-sculpture of the most elaborate description, in the highest <i xml:lang="it">alto-relievo</i> of life-size, of more than 200 feet in length, containing about 170 figures, and executed in the hardest marble which could be procured.‚Äù After three years of toil the memorial was still far from completion, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott thought it advisable to give a dinner to the workmen, ‚Äúas a substantial recognition of his appreciation of their skill and energy.‚Äù ‚ÄúTwo long tables,‚Äù we are told, ‚Äúconstructed of scaffold planks, were arranged in the workshops, and covered with newspapers, for want of tablecloths. Upwards of eighty men sat down. Beef and mutton, plum pudding and cheese were supplied in abundance, and each man who desired it had three pints of beer, gingerbeer and lemonade being provided for the teetotalers, who formed a very considerable proportion‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Several toasts were given and many of the workmen spoke, almost all of them commencing by ‚ÄòThanking God that they enjoyed good health;‚Äô some alluded to the temperance that prevailed amongst them, others observed how little swearing was ever heard, whilst all said how pleased and proud they were to be engaged on so great a work.‚Äù</p>
				<p>Gradually the edifice approached completion. The one hundred and seventieth life-size figure in the frieze was chiselled, the granite pillars arose, the mosaics were inserted in the allegorical pediments, the four colossal statues representing the greater Christian virtues, the four other colossal statues representing the greater moral virtues, were hoisted into their positions, the eight bronzes representing the greater sciences‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAstronomy, Chemistry, Geology, Geometry, Rhetoric, Medicine, Philosophy, and Physiology‚ÅÝ‚Äîwere fixed on their glittering pinnacles, high in air. The statue of Physiology was particularly admired. ‚ÄúOn her left arm,‚Äù the official description informs us, ‚Äúshe bears a newborn infant, as a representation of the development of the highest and most perfect of physiological forms; her hand points towards a microscope, the instrument which lends its assistance for the investigation of the minuter forms of animal and vegetable organisms.‚Äù At last the gilded cross crowned the dwindling galaxies of superimposed angels, the four continents in white marble stood at the four corners of the base, and, seven years after its inception, in <time datetime="1872-07">July, 1872</time>, the monument was thrown open to the public.</p>
				<p>But four more years were to elapse before the central figure was ready to be placed under its starry canopy. It was designed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFoley, though in one particular the sculptor‚Äôs freedom was restricted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott. ‚ÄúI have chosen the sitting posture,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝScott said, ‚Äúas best conveying the idea of dignity befitting a royal personage.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFoley ably carried out the conception of his principal. ‚ÄúIn the attitude and expression,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúthe aim has been, with the individuality of portraiture, to embody rank, character, and enlightenment, and to convey a sense of that responsive intelligence indicating an active, rather than a passive, interest in those pursuits of civilisation illustrated in the surrounding figures, groups, and <i xml:lang="it">relievos</i>‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ To identify the figure with one of the most memorable undertakings of the public life of the Prince‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe International Exhibition of <time datetime="1851">1851</time>‚ÅÝ‚Äîa catalogue of the works collected in that first gathering of the industry of all nations, is placed in the right hand.‚Äù The statue was of bronze gilt and weighed nearly ten tons. It was rightly supposed that the simple word ‚ÄúAlbert,‚Äù cast on the base, would be a sufficient means of identification.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
